This is Jockel Podcast number 232, with echo Charles and me, Jockel Willink. Good evening, echo.
Good evening. From Colonel Grosby, commanding fifth manchester regimen, dear madam,
you're a letter of the 20th of August reached me safely. Your per person died a heroic soldiers death
and all belonging to the fifth manchester regimen from myself downwards are proud of having been comrades
of so brave and honorable, a lad. I'm glad to be able to inform you he did not suffer
and he great pain. He died saying he hoped if he ever got over his wounds he would soon be able to return to his duty.
I'm informed by those who were present with him in the blockhouse at the time that he passed away happily
and willing to meet his God. You have every reason to be proud of his memory
and may God help and comfort you in your great sorrow.
I will inquire if he has left any keep say that could be either sent to or kept for you.
I've asked my wife to call and see you the next time she is in Manchester.
Believe me, yours faithfully, H. Grosby, Colonel.
And that right there is a letter of condolence, written back to a grieving mother in England during the second
Boer War in Africa, South Africa.
And of course the letter is painted the picture of a, well let's just say a kind of perfect heroic death,
which I guess is what any mother would want to hear.
But make no mistake about any war, including the Boer War in South Africa, that this scene was awful.
So the Boer War in South Africa, you know, it's a war that people consider to be one of the first modern wars.
There's a bunch of wars you could throw in there.
That are also called that.
I mean the Americans of the War was in some ways considered a modern war.
You know, you had some wars that were right around there that weren't a modern war.
They were kind of a mixing.
There's one battle that the British fought against the modest Sudanese.
It was in 1898 to September of 1898.
And during this battle, you know, it was British soldiers and actually Egyptian soldiers as well,
versus these these Sudanese.
And during the battle, there was 48 of the British and Egyptians who were killed, 382 wounded.
And on the Sudanese side, there was 12,000 dead and 13,000 wounded.
So that was kind of a lopsided battle.
And if you stand up against the British and try and fight them in that manner of, hey, we'll go toe to toe.
We have machine guns or we don't have machine guns, but we have.
We have repeating rifles.
We have a massive advantage over you and you're going to continue to charge it us.
We're going to mow you down and that's what happened there.
So what happens in the second brewer war is an early example of asymmetric war fair meaning.
You have a small group in this case, the Boers, which is a Afra cons term that means farmers.
And there's between 20 and 60,000 of them and they're going up against the British Empire,
which at the time was a massive powerhouse obviously, they end up with 500,000 troops.
So 350,000 brets, 150,000 colonials and 100,000 Africans that are fighting on the British side.
The second brewer war, the first one took place in 1880, but it was much, much smaller.
They started with a farmer that refused to pay taxes.
You know, that seems to be a common thread.
We don't like to pay taxes.
And the government confiscated his farm and his equipment and they were going to have an auction.
And then these other farmers got together and they attacked the auction.
And this is the original term, the term commando, which we usually use it to talk about an individual person.
But the original term meant a group of people.
It was called a commando meant, you know, whatever, 30, 40, 100 guys band together, kind of like a militia group.
And the way, and they kind of acted in the way we think commando's act, which means they, you know, they would use mobility and speed and violence of action, surprise and set of ambushes and those kind of behaviors.
And meanwhile, the brets are still in that, in that first brewer war, the brets are still wearing red uniforms.
And the students saying this is a, this is a, this is a strange world. This is as, you know, this is during the evolution of war.
And they're still firing, you know, they're still setting up in lines and firing valleys together as a group and on command, you know, ready to fire that type of thing.
And meanwhile, the, the brewer commando's are hiding behind trees and the first battle that they have, there's 120 brets dead or wounded.
And there's two brewers dead and five wounded. So, you know, this, this war lasted 10 weeks, the first one. And like I said, it was less of a war, you know, light action.
And eventually, they kind of go into this uneasy piece. And then the second brewer war comes along and, and you know, I'm just trying to give some high level.
The second brewer war is a fight between it's, it's these allies, these, these new brewer allies, there's, there's two new states that are formed. One of them is called, I think it's officially called the South African Republic, but I usually see it referred to as Transval.
And the other, there's another state or country called the Orange Free State. And so here's the basis of these, these are a little bit for, you know, the shape of Africa, you get the bottom of Africa, where South Africa is today, you, you go inland a little bit. And what happened was
the first brewers were brewers. And so, they were brewers. But they were brewers, but they were brewers at one point. They stopped slavery, like no more slavery. And the boars, they still wanted slavery. Because they were farmers and they, well, that, that was part of their economy, and well, they just thought that they deserved to have slaves.
And so, they were more, there was no kind of deal set up for them to be compensated to say, look, if you want us to change the way we're running this economy, we need to, you know, we need money, you know, we need money to hire people.
So they looked for some kind of compensation, the brewers were like, no, this is an immoral activity, and we're not having slavery anymore, it's all, it's over. So the boars, or large portion of boars, which again, not now, these are, these are different groups of people.
I want to say, mainly Dutch, the boars were mainly Dutch settlers, which is why they speak African, which is like a version of Dutch. So they, about 15,000 of them leave and they march north. And so now they set up these two states where slavery still allowed.
And they, and they kind of exist for a while, you know, in a relatively, I guess, in a relatively peaceful way, at least in terms with the British. Well, guess what they find in this land that they end up settling in, they find gold, they find diamonds.
And this starts to, well, now you, now you gold diamonds more, that's where it leaves to.
The, there's kind of three phases that this war goes through. In the first one, the brewers are unprepared. They're not ready for this.
In the second phase, the brewers bring in massive numbers of people and supplies, and they kind of just war of attrition over power, the boars.
And then the boars go into like full guerilla warfare mode, insurgency mode. And then the breats go hardcore scorched earth. We're going to win war of attrition.
And the first ever concentration camps, I'm pretty sure that the term concentration camps comes from this war, because what the British ended up doing is saying, okay, we don't want to, we don't want to harm the women and children. So they took the, the boor women and children and put them in these camps, while the camps were a total disaster and 25 plus thousand women and children died of starvation and disease in those camps.
And eventually just through just harsh brutality, the, the boor's were broken and they surrendered in 1902.
But from a perspective, from just a strategic perspective, if you think about this, it took three long bloody and expensive years for the mighty British Empire.
To defeat these kind of ad hoc commando units from the boor side. And that's what they actually were. They would, they would assemble, you know, hey, all of us are going to get together. They would kind of elect who's going to run it and then they would decide what they were going to do sort of by consensus. That's what these original commando units were.
Winston Churchill, he worked as a reporter during this war and he was captured, I think he was captured on a train.
He was put into a prisoner of war camp. He escaped. I mean, that's kind of one of his, that's one of the things that made Winston Churchill Winston Churchill.
And that's also where he got this name commando that they started using a World War II. I'm pretty sure he derived the name commando like for the British commando's because their activities, their, their methodology is we're going to be based on what the, what the South African boor's did, what the South African commando units did.
And he applied that name to the kind of the early special operation. It's types troops in World War II. And there's another thing that I think about when I, when I think about the boors and the, I think this kind of captures
certainly an attitude that is prevalent in special operations forces and really in the military. And it's a, it's a saying, it's kind of wrapped up in a saying that the, that the South African boors had and the, the,
the saying is, and I'm not going to do this right because you know, it's a foreign language, but the, the saying is on boor mackon plan. And, and what it means is a boor makes a plan. And it's a pretty cool saying because what do you do and something goes wrong. What do you, you know, what's, what's our, what are we going to do when something goes wrong, you know, it's a boor is going to make a plan. We're going to figure it out. We're going to, we're going to do something about it. We're not going to sit back and just let things unfold.
That was their attitude that's still their attitude and, and of course looks out for Africa's been a place of a lot of turmoil apartheid.
It's, it's been, you know, financially just a disaster at some point. It's it's just a tough place. And I've been there. I've actually been lucky enough to have been down there.
It's an awesome country. It's an epic country. The, the nature there is just unbelievable shout out to the troopers down there in South Africa, Paul Slade, his, his South African crew, his company, they have, they have legit,
do you, you, you shout out to fit fight fit Malaysia down there. And you know, that was interesting. Awesome guys, awesome gym, a guy named chef.
And chef, who's who's legit and, and his buddy Rich, they, they run this gym down there and we went there and trained when I was in South Africa. I had like a,
it seemed like about a 14 hour death roll with chef who's a total beast. Penny Thomas also from South Africa, Penny Thomas, the chef to to Penny Thomas, but incredible place, incredible place.
And you know, that gym was amazing. What they were doing in that gym and one, one thing that kind of surprised me is it was totally wide open, like every different type of person was in there.
Rich kids, poor kids, black kids, white kids just wide open. There's incredible atmosphere and everybody freaking for you. And so if you ever are in South Africa, go check that place out. It's awesome.
But, you know, ever since I went down there and even before that, I mean, it's just a war, you know, if you know the root word of the word, command, you always think about what this was all about. And so, there's, you know, I'm always looking for lessons learned, there's a book called the Boor War and military reforms, and it's written by a guy named Jay Stone and another guy named Erwin Schmidl.
And it's an a very interesting book the way it analyzes what happened and what lessons were learned. And I'm going to focus on the lessons learned that they pulled from it. And I'm sure at some point, there's I've got a, I've got quite a few good books of, you know, the normal jockel podcast first person account of a guy that was on the battlefield, which looks some of these battles were just insane, especially because you get to see the, well, will will will will just, will just jump into it.
So a couple of things to kick this thing off. Here we go, go into the book.
Britain was unique among European great powers in retaining a voluntary army. So this time, a lot of Europe had conscripts still. So you're just, you're just going to do your service, you're going to draft it.
In order maintain a flow of recruits equipment had to be of above average quality, making the British army the most expensive in the world, per soldier. So there's spend a lot of money.
With government preoccupied by the budget, there was little room for innovation, much of the 19th century, not a lot of, not a lot of innovation happening.
One of the things that they talk about is of all the specialized departments. It was intelligence, where the dual British deficiencies of organization and budgetary restrictions are best illustrated.
In 1899, the German spent an equivalent of $270,000 for an intelligent staff of 300 officers, Great Britain, only spent 11,000.
So they're not spending much on intel, and where this comes to play as perhaps the war's most glaring intelligence failure was the lack of adequate maps of South Africa and in particular of the Bur reports.
The Bur's for their part published no maps and would allow no British subject into their countries to draw them. So they'd go to knew what was going on.
It's also interesting because for them to make that, for them to proactively do that, they knew the importance of maps.
And a lot of people don't understand the importance of terrain when it comes to combat. If you don't understand the terrain, you're in trouble.
Here's a little cut of what the officers were like, identified non-professional, polo playing officer corps, recruited from a narrow social base, resulted from a system which was itself dependent on private funding for an officer's expenses. The army was suited to recreational life.
In the 1890s an officer could absent himself from regimental duties for as much as 250 days annually. In the name of sport.
I mean, I'm going to tell you right now, you get 30 days leave in the US military. These guys are getting 250 days.
Even when on duty recreation was facilitated by making an officer's time his own after the completion of regular duties usually about 930 a.m.
While the ideal of sport may have been carried to an extreme, it perhaps helped develop the trade most often associated with British officers. They're conspicuous courage. That virtue was to be indispensable for the attainment of rank.
And the large numbers of Victoria Cross is one by senior officers attest to this fact. The officers' com courage tended to radiate throughout the ranks.
So this idea of these just totally brave British officers that are sort of, well, that's what they count on. They count on hey, we're brave. That's how we're going to win.
But continue on courage alone, however, did not produce a good officers for professional education and attitude were often lacking.
Few officers were acquainted with foreign languages and the writing of technical military studies was found upon.
Think about that.
You're a professor that's going to lead the military and it's frowned upon to write about military subjects.
The only proof of this is the fact that in 1900 Germany produced 50% of the world's military literature, France 25% and Great Britain 1%
If the raw material of trade of the officer corps was somewhat lacking only owing to portraying this system served only to compound its errors. So you can see what you're dealing with.
Doesn't this paint the most stereotypical picture of these officer guys that are like, hey, I'm smart, I'm a great athlete, you know, you know, why don't you just study this stuff on brave.
And you also think about Germany, look, Germany has a
A militaristic nature, right, and obviously even more so before World War II and before World War I even more so think about one country's producing 50% of the world's military literature.
That's insane.
And the brits are producing less than one percent.
A couple other things here about what we're dealing with long term 12 year enlistments created a professional rank and file in order to attract manpower Britain had to pay in both relative and absolute terms.
During prosperous times, pay had to go up or the army it was feared would be left with only the drugs of society.
To deal with this perceived problem, the English army had always maintained a high proportion of officers and NCOs.
Supervision was omnipresent and individuality was systematically stamped out of the recruit, so it's a super top heavy organization.
And all there like everything's just being oversupervised and you're always being told what to do.
It's always amazing the you know in the army or the Marine Corps, there'll be a guy that's 20 years old and he'll be in charge of like a legit number of guys.
Then and where is this is the opposite? This is where hey, I've been in the army for nine years and I'm not in charge of anyone because I'm getting directed on how to do everything.
The natural outgrowth of such closely ordered system was a soldier bred to difference and lacking in initiative.
You can see where this is going.
How much of this was due to process and how much was due to raw material is open to question 18.99 only 18% of the enlisted men could be considered illiterate.
So got a bunch of guys that can't even read.
Reserve components got to talk about this just to let you know that they're out.
The reserve components known as militia reserves, militia volunteers or young and re had several distinct roles and they played the national defense system.
So they're going to get called up as well kind of the reservists.
The army was totally directed toward home and colonial defense.
In examining battlefield effectiveness, one must go beyond questions of organization and numbers to matters of tactical doctrine.
For the British, this was most often equated with overwhelming firepower.
That's what their their doctrine is working over well with firepower.
Every soldier received an issue of 200 rounds annually for target practice. That's a joke.
All training and practice fire was carried out from kneeling and standing positions.
I'm going to promise you, you don't want to be standing on the battlefield.
Muscatry practiced and this is a quote consisted of firing limited number of rounds at stationary bullseye targets.
At fixed known ranges progressing from 100 to 1000 yards, the distances gradually increasing instead of decreasing as they normally do in war.
Once a year there was a field firing when the batai would spend a glorious morning,
lacing away at the number of screens set up in conspicuous positions, which in no sane enemy would ever think of occupying.
So that's what they're doing. They're lining up 150 rounds where to be used solely for practicing collective fire.
So out of your 200 rounds, 150 of them are going to be, hey, we're all standing up and lying and we're practicing shooting together.
On the battlefield regulation stated that infantry fire was to be open at 450 meters as opposed to 600 to 1000 meters for the Germans.
While the British continued to place undue emphasis upon volley fire, the Germans preferred individual skirmish fire.
Large sections of training manuals dealt with close order battalion formations, such as the square or echelon which deemed especially useful in savage warfare.
So what they're talking about there is the Zulu wars, like hey, you're getting attacked, we're going to stay in line.
And as these people attack us with spears, we're going to gun them down.
And it's important that we stay tight and put up big valleys of fire.
Meanwhile, the Germans are over there going, hey, skirmish line, you know, cover and move, make a little bound forward.
Sir Frederick Marys the famed military historian of the period lent his prestige to a volume that taught the advance is to be made
as rapidly as possible, the main object being the attack with the bayonet.
Independent firing is generally advisable only at short range, but so did you hear that?
Individual firing is only advisable at short range, but if an especially favorable target presents itself, it may be ordered also at the middle of extreme ranges.
Whilst the attack is being developed, follow these only are to be fired by a section or subsections till the order is given for independent firing.
That's what they're doing.
More sophisticated solutions involving fire and movement, cover and move, could not be developed as long as heavy reliance was placed upon the bayonet.
Which in turn was the most, which in turn was most effective in massed formations and proved a psychological weapon par excellence, faith in the bayonet enabled troops to advance with the intent to use it.
It was feared that if this principle is ever called into question, then the troops would not approach the enemy close enough to be of any use whatsoever.
So they are, they're using the bayonet charge as sort of the foundational culmination of their movement.
These guys have guns.
You know, the enemy is gonna have guns.
Tactical flexibility was extremely limited since the drillbook of 1896 did not include any instructions for the movement of troops in extended order.
Exended order means you're spread apart. They're all that close to order. They're all basically shoulder to shoulder.
Oral commands tended to be extremely formal to the point of awkwardness. For instance, one said that blank face, the blank being filled by some objects such as a building rather than right face, similarly one had to say advance right incline hole rather than take cover behind those rocks.
The British tactical scheme supposed that once units were engaged, they would function mechanically.
They would not consider that morale might falter under adversity. Think about that. They just think when they give the order to go.
Guys are gonna go. morale will not falter.
During the years immediately preceding the Burr war, the army had two opportunities to test the effectiveness of its organization in doctrine, 1898 British Britain stage.
They're just peacetime maneuvers in more than a generation. Some 50,000 men organized in two corps and two cavalry brigades took part over a period of three months.
The maneuvers in fact went on only from breakfast to dinner.
As officers felt the need to be freeing the evenings to attend to the London Theatre and socialize with the country gentry. It's horrible.
This exercise was held on familiar grounds of aldershot, which was unfortunate, that's encouraged in a collective reconnaissance.
So you already know, so we're not gonna do any reconnaissance. We already walk around here all the time.
Perhaps the greatest revolution in the ineptness of the high command and dealing with more troops than most of its members had ever seen one place.
Their flaws noted in the officer's failure to mount secondary attacks and a continued lack of coordination with artillery.
When forced to dismount cavalry showed considerable firepower in the defensive supported by machine guns on offense, however,
that still proved inadequate in reconnaissance. The second phase which took place at aldershot was even less successful than the first.
Infintery advanced without the use of cover.
This is a nightmare. Reconnaissance was poor. No digging in of trenches was permitted, allegedly for fear of damaging the downs, the fields at their own.
General sir Butler, not having commanded troops for 12 years, ended maneuvers with a disastrous one to one assault after marching his command 14 miles.
You can kind of see what we're dealing with. Are you getting a picture of what we're dealing with?
It's not a good picture. It's not a good picture. It's not a good picture. It's a peace time scenario.
And look, they were in wars during these timeframes. I mean, I talked about what they did. They were in wars.
This was England, man. They were all over the world, fight and skirmishes.
But they weren't getting in it in this kind of these tactics that they were using or working because they're going against people that aren't armed properly.
So here we go. At the outbreak of hostilities, the Army could muster only 27,000.
So now we're getting into this war. It could only muster 27,000 men in the field of operations, whereas the boars field fielded 45,000.
Clearly, the situation differed from colonial wars in which the opponents lack the ability to monitor a gradual buildup pretty strength.
Requesting troops and knowing what to do with them are two separate matters.
Even after the outbreak of the war, no effort was made immediately to increase the intelligence staff or draw plans for troop utilization.
It was the Army after all that was responsible for the request that the colonials send only infantry and no cavalry.
General Bullar and this is the guy initially kicking off the war. The feeder commander was to complain of the last minute plans.
Here's what he had to say. The details were arranged by a committee sitting at the war office.
So we already don't like that. Like there's a war. You're in South Africa. There's people up in England. There's no internet.
There's no video teller conferencing. They're coming up with plans of how you're going to fight this thing. They're not even there.
I was not invited to attend its meetings or a furnace with the minutes of its deliberations.
I pressed for the employment of General French with the cavalry and for Colonel Miles on the staff. I had no voice in the appointment of the commanders or of the senior staff officers selected.
This is a good old boy network. This is guys going, oh, sounds like we've got a war in South Africa.
I'd like to participate in that. Can you put me on? Put me on for a...
A jaunt down to the colonies to characterize British military establishment of 1899. Much should be made of its apathetic, snobbish and non-professional officer corps.
It's highly disciplined ranks and this is... You're going to hear this a lot.
Let me say this also. I've worked with the brids before. They are outstanding. They are an outstanding military.
And they obviously transformed from what we're talking about right now.
But... And that this is why. This is why.
And I was going to say they used that we're disciplined.
And many times when they used the word discipline, they use it both as a negative endopositive throughout this book.
Because they... When they talk about the extreme discipline, it's like, hey, these guys weren't going to make decisions on their own.
They were just going to follow orders. So they used that term there. And they also talk about how it was a positive in some situations as well.
Because they were disciplined soldiers that would make things happen.
So here we go. Like I said, apathetic, snobbish and non-professional officer corps, highly disciplined ranks and conservative anti-militaristic maloo in which it functioned.
How else to explain the Queen's regulations of 1899 which found space for 71 regulations dealing with dress.
And only four for muscatry. And one for field training.
While still noting that the troops were old clothes to maneuver since the troops would not be anxious to buy new ones.
You see what we're dealing with?
Yep.
And here we go. Despite these deficiencies, the world as a whole held the British Army in high regard in light of its long string of victories dating back to 1815.
You know, they beat Napoleon. They beat Napoleon, right? They beat the world champ.
You know? And so now they're the champ.
The British themselves believed that the Army was never in better condition either as regards to the zeal and skill of its officers from the highest to the lowest.
The training and discipline of the men and the organizations of all branch to the service.
That's their attitude. Can we say arrogance and ego? Yes, we can.
Thus, expiration of the brewer, ultimatum on October 11th, 1899,
regarding a cessation of all British military preparations held no major threat, despite the fact that the Army would be facing a relatively modern foe for the first time.
If men and material, obviously not reading the whole book, there's the caveat.
If men and material are proved to be in short supply in the early stages of the war, such as not the case with shipping.
Britain has the premier maritime power and long been accustomed to the movement of troops by sea.
The massive commitment transported 188,000 men, 36,000 horses, 409 pieces of artillery, and 1,951 vehicles over 6,000 miles without any serious consequences on the level of British commerce.
That's amazing.
So, logistically, they can get it on. The British Navy, the Royal Navy. Oh, you want us to deliver some goods?
We're going to deliver some goods. Supplemented by reserves, militia, young and revollentures, and eventually colonials the Army grew to four times its original size by the spring of 1900,
the forces in the field actually outnumbered the combined population of transvol and of free-born state.
Can you imagine you're going to war with more soldiers than they have people?
And it's still going to take you three years to get this thing sorted out. It's crazy.
Manpower of any sort was increasingly welcome in the later stages of the conflict.
Free use of the empires, entire manpower cannot be considered due to certain philosophical constraints,
which Captain A.E. Oppenheim voiced.
We must never, this is just such a, I just read this and I was like, wow.
This is not, this is very interesting. Here's what this guy says. This Captain.
We must never depart from the Cardinal Imperial Principle that the Imperial Army alone is privileged to meet any enemy at any time under any circumstance.
We must never resort to free use of native armies of the empire.
The white man, the ruling race, must bear the burden in the appeal to arms, must assert its superiority,
and must do it willingly and sack reficingly for their inlies the vital principle of empire.
The day that sees the white man shrinking from his responsibility, that sees him shifting the burden, burdened,
complacently from his own shoulders to those of his subject races, will also see the doom of his Imperial Dominion.
Now that's something that I, that definitely was interesting to me because, you know, you think of these imperialists,
you think of the British empire going in, well, we got a bunch of, whatever, we got a bunch of black guys down here in Africa, let's make them fight.
And here is this attitude of, no, that's not right.
That's kind of crazy, right?
It's interesting for sure.
Fast forward in a little bit. In retrospect, one cannot help a being pressed by the wars impact upon the army service corps,
increased the numbers, redesigned for a lighter and more durable enlarged system of animals.
Furthermore, special bulk oriented, faster supply columns were developed for cavalry support.
For the first time limits instituted on officers' kits, this is why I lied to this port.
And the notorious cast iron kitchen and wagon load of champagne associated with general baller became a thing of the past.
This is like one of some of the things that they figured out during this war is that it's not smart to bring a cast iron kitchen and wagon loads of champagne.
I think it's safe to say to put this in a modern part of this is that this is the war where shit got real.
I mean, think about the difference you're going to warn you're thinking, hey, let's make sure we got our champagne loaded up.
Yeah, so what is it? I mean, where does that to come from just the sheer numbers and history and history man?
They've been running around kicking ass for, well, since they said they're 1815, you know, they were British were just kind of dominating.
And we know what happens when you get that disease of victory.
Yeah, champagne, oh, yeah, hey, I guarantee you.
Some of these officers that they're talking about were thinking, oh, I'd like to go to South Africa. It's a little war going on. I'll go get my adventure done.
Yeah, thank. And the thing is, here's the bottom line. I have this in the notes later, but.
Imagine you're, you're used to boxing, right? And you're going to box someone and you grow in there and you've, you've trained a box, which means you're going to stand up and you're going to throw punches and you're not going to kick or elbow or do a take down or you're definitely not going to do anything like I gouge or, you know,
maybe have something in your glove and shank someone, right? You're definitely not doing that stuff.
And by the way, so now you've been fighting under those rules for what is it? 85 years?
So over 85 years, you've been fighting, and by the way, winning and winning because guess what?
Everyone you're fighting, I mean, if we try to, if we try to figure out what this looked like, I bet you this looks like a 300 pound boxer that's going up against a 100 pound boxer.
That's kind of what all these wars have been like up to at this point, right? Hey, we're going to roll in there.
And this person's going to be small and we can, we're going to do the boxing thing and they're going to throw, they're punches don't even hurt us.
And eventually you just knock this human out.
And then one day, not only do you come up against someone that's going to do double leg take down the nose, chokes and arm locks, but that will also shank you.
You know, they don't have any rules, it's not just no rules MMA.
It's no rules, I'm going to, I'm going to have a shift and I'm going to cut your throat while, you know,
ding, ding, round starts, you know, I come out with a K-bar and stick it into your spine. That's what we're talking about.
Yeah. So why did they have this attitude? Because for all these years, they were the heavyweight champ and they, hey, I'm, I got a fight tonight. Cool.
Make sure you bring the, you know, make sure you bring the shots for when we're done.
Yeah, it's going to take about three minutes.
And then I want, you know, I want to have about after party like the old UFC guys, I'm sure they're still good, but I haven't been in that part of your mouth.
But that's what it was. Yeah. Yeah, like it was so much like that that they would bring the champagne.
It's like they'd bring their trophy with them. Yeah, exactly. Exactly. This is disease of victory to the end degree.
Yeah. It's crazy, man. It's crazy.
During the course of the bore war, the Afrocona armies, Afrocona armies numbered about 40,000 men, no more of 20,000 whom were ever on the field at one time.
So most people they ever had on the field was 20,000.
The question then is how could such a motley force of farmers defied the British Empire for so long?
One answer is as a French observer phrased it was simply the rifle, the rifle of small caliber, rapid firing, flat trajectory and smoke was powder.
And as another big advance you had guns that the gun, the gun powder didn't make smoke anymore, which meant you could shoot and you could hide.
And you could continue to attack and you wouldn't have the battlefield filled up with smoke.
But then this is a little bit, it goes a little bit further than that.
The boars true strength was not at long ranges.
Because they talk about how everyone thinks all the boars were hunters, they were farmers and they would really good shots at long ranges.
But this is kind of just, in addition to that, their true strength was not long ranges, but rather in sharp shooting at under 300 yards.
Boars skill in that regard was demonstrated in the later stages of the war when their arms were mostly captured from the British and they still maintained their mastery and small unit fire fights.
Rifles alone could not assure survival in the face of the vastly superior British numbers and cumulative power, firepower.
From the beginning even when they were overly attached to their wagons, the boars were able to outmarch their opponents.
When freed from their baggage, so they eventually they carried wagons in the beginning and then they finally were like, hey, we don't even bring in these things.
When freed of their baggage, train and camp followers, the difference in rate of movement increased rapidly.
Boars mounted on ponies, could on occasion travel 60 miles a day for several days on end and when called upon,
there's sturdy little horses could go for three days without food.
Such marches however could only be considered on the basis of a ready supply of remounts.
The additional factor was the Boars ponie lighter load weight and distribution. The Boars saddle weight half that of the British.
The rider carried only a little food, his rifle is ammunition and a blanket.
Everything else was transported on a spare mount, consequently a Boar pony carried 250 pounds as compared to the British chargers nearly 400 pounds.
So the light weight.
Light weight means going back to the heavy weight versus the 100 pound guy, the 100 pound guy's got some mobility.
And he's got some endurance.
They used their artillery very well talking about that a little bit concealment and protection where their cardinal principle.
This is for their artillery. They were for they were frequently outnumbered in the field.
Several alternative protection protected positions were developed for each gun.
Thus permitting rapid replacement when a piece came under fire.
Speed of movement was the essence of the Boar Gunners and the British were constantly amazed by their ability to bring heavy ordinance rapidly into action at unexpected locations.
So they would pre-dig positions.
So as soon as they started taking fire because eventually when you're shooting the enemies going to see where you're at or they're going to judge where you're at.
They're going to start shooting at you.
They would immediately move their gun into a pre-determined position.
The Boar's use of single guns rather than battery. They're talking about big artillery guns.
Was the focused of considerable amount of contemporary interest.
A single piece could keep an entire army awake for a night firing at six miles range.
The Boar's realized the morale effect of unreturned fire.
And the sense of security provided when one is assured of covering fire from one's own guns under any withdrawal.
They realized the psychological warfare just dropped in bombs from six miles away from one gun.
And how powerful that was.
The machine gun proved more deadly and was considered an equivalent of 25 men.
Thanks to the master masterly use of terrain and smokeless powder in battle the Boars were often able to give the impression of greater numbers than in fact existed.
Captain Stlokum, the American observer, noted that at the battle of Kalesno and we're getting into that.
Not a single Boar was to be seen from the beginning of the battle to the end.
On occasion, the Boars would deliberately expose themselves in order to further confuse the enemy.
So in this one of the opening battles.
14,000 Brits versus 4,500 Boars. The Brits had 143 killed.
750,500. The Boars had eight killed. The 30 wounded.
Use of dummy guns black powder to attract fire and command detonated diversionary charges further confuse the Brits.
And the attacks had spying cop and Nicholson's neck. The Boars advanced in small mutually supporting groups rather than long lines.
Generally they tried to deploy their younger men forward their old men to the rear and foreign volunteers to further back.
So we have cover move going on. Totally different. Mutually supporting elements.
You know what the basis of maneuvering on the basis of fire move and cover move and fire maneuver is mutually supporting elements.
In fact, the minute that you get too far away from another element that you can't mutually support each other, you are going to die.
Push in forward. By largely avoiding concentration and attack the Boars forfeited the initiative and allowed British time to deploy.
So this is something that the Boars didn't do well.
They didn't go on the attack. They didn't press the attack.
They didn't press the attack. So they did an advantage and they wouldn't take advantage of the advantage that they had.
When they could no longer extend their lines beyond the British, the British flank's conventional fighting ended.
Inevitably the advance of the British and ceaseless Afrikaana retreat took their toll on the Boar morale with the fall of Komati Port and the war seemed over.
Unable to contend fondly with massive British armies after the fall of Bloomfundheim, the Boars resorted increasingly to raids in order to forfeurses threatened communications and supply gain information, alarm the countryside, disrupt mobilization and concentrations.
Devastate enemy, held lands and release prisoners. So that's the mode that they went into. That's straight up guerrilla warfare. For the Brits, war soon degenerated into a ceaseless pursuit of an elusive foe.
They were all too frequently caught on a wares by Boar, by Boar, commandos doubling back and attacking.
Favorite Boar poise were setting grass fires to slow pursuit or riding parallel to supposed pursuers dismounting firing and falling back.
Boar organization and war plans are also subjects of importance upon call.
Every male citizen was responsible to present himself with ten days, rations, a horse, a rifle and 30 rounds of ammunition.
So this is how the Boars were set up. Men were organized into commandos based on electoral districts, although they were free to change units out.
Well, this is told the Centralized Command. A commando would have anywhere from 300 to 3000 men.
Command was vested in field cornet selected one port per ward since command was election most new actions were undertaken by consensus such a system could not long survive in warfare.
And we're going to, this is massive decentralized command. It's actually decentralized command to a to an extreme that becomes ineffective and oftentimes they end up not being able.
And the reason why they couldn't coordinate attacks work together, be like, okay, the enemies on the ropes, let's go coordinate and crush them. They wouldn't quite be able to pull that off.
You know, they would deal with consensus like, hey, I don't agree with that idea. We should wait a little longer than it's so they don't take action.
So there's that codomy of leadership decentralized command is great, but you can take it too far.
This is where I was talking about earlier. If the three capabilities of any army are its marching marksmanship and discipline, then is obvious where the booers fatal flaw lay in its lack of discipline.
For without discipline, there can be no coherent attack. The booers so valued their own lives and increased power of the defense that they tended to forsake the tactical offense. This lack of aggressiveness was evidenced in their proclivity for sieges.
I'm African, they outnumbered Baden pals force 10,000 men to 700 and that they didn't attack.
They had 10,000 against 700.
Hey, we're just going to hold siege warfare. We're just going to sit here and wait, wait you out.
I mean, if I have 10,000 against 700, we're coming to get you.
Such unwillingness to launch attacks consistently hurt the booer cause tactically and strategically, even in the field, the booers had the booers been more aggressive.
The British would not have had the time to maneuver around to their flank.
Lack of discipline was not only a drawback to booer attacks, but also had peculiar ramifications for the process of surrender. White flags had never been used during the native wars and thus it was not understood that everyone must stop firing when the flags were raised by either side.
The British frequently complained that while some booers raised their hands, others would continue firing.
And that caused problems.
Much to British, shagrin, Lord Roberts wrote, the booers have been the first to introduce into war the theory that every individual has the right to ask quarter for himself at any moment in an action.
A theory which our own soldiers seem to have almost invariably accepted.
So you have a couple people surrender, a couple people don't, that's confusing.
And this is interesting.
The Europeans never understood the bureful philosophy of inflicting damage and then escaping into the veld, which is like the open field, into the bush, basically.
To a burger and the term burger, in this case, it's basically the white citizens down there that control that we're in control.
To a burger, no position was worth dying for. If he could not retreat, he would surrender.
Naturally, some might feel that horses only complicated the booers' position when kept to the rear and out of artillery range, the burger was capable of neither escaped nor pursued.
The boars seemed insecure without their horses and yet we're incapable of dealing with cavalry, when mounted.
So this is something that comes up a lot. You know, you had these brits where they look at, you know, the code of honor and they are, they're not going to surrender and they're going to fight to the death and they're going to hold positions if ordered.
And the boars are kind of like, hey, oh, why would I stay here?
And if I, if I'm not just going to die on this hill, if we're going to lose the hill, I'm going to stay alive. I'm going to surrender.
So what you end up with is a really fluid element and you end up with a really rigid element.
As Commander and Chief, Boller violated one of the Cardinal Rules of Warfare, and this is kicking off the war by dividing the an inferior force faced with a more mobile enemy operating on interior lines.
So he, one of the first things that this guy, Boller does and interesting, it's not in this book, but I read it in some of the other literature about this.
This guy, Boller was like an old guy. I think he was 59 years old and he was kind of not in the best of health.
And the boars called him the Red Bull, because the name was Boller. They called him Red Bull, because his face was all, I'm imagine like, you know, the alcoholic kind of sunburned.
You know, guy, stereotypical guy, that's what he was. And so they kind of made fun of him. They called him Red Bull and he had some issues.
And this whole thing kicks off in this thing that they call in the British military the black week, because they took massive losses.
Not just in personnel, but in on the battlefield. And even when they would might win a battle, they're losing so many people because they're doing their winning battles at a massive casualty rate.
So now it's it's starting to talk about the problems, the British army problems at the beginning of the war, and it says, you just need to look at how the various major commands were set up.
In the early part of the war, it says, by the Battle of Graspin, November 25th, 1899, the British had a four to one superiority, but it'd come to respect Boer firepower.
And this case in attempt was made to pin the enemy frontly with infantry, while a well-spaced calm of the naval brigade was to attack the Boer right. The tactically flexible Boers advanced to delay the pinning forces, while converging their fire on the blue jackets as they bunched up to ascend the slope.
Despite suffering 50% casualties, the sailors broke through, supported somewhat belatedly by overwhelming numbers of infantry.
Again, the burgers evaded pursuit. The British still believed in their systems superiority, and overlooked then inflexibility of their open-order tactics.
The disproportionate nature of losses was still unclear. So they win this battle, but they take 50% casualties.
And one of the things that they say is to cover up the low number of Boer casualties, stories circulated that the Boers had run away carrying their dead and wounded.
In reality, men really stopped to pick up their dead when they're being overrun. So the British kind of patded themselves on the back and said, well, you know, the Boers just took their dead with them.
That's why there's not many dead bodies here. You know, we have a done.
I apologize to everyone in South Africa for my annihilation of all these words.
Paul Slade, I apologize.
At the Battle of Modern River, the British once again fell victim to poor reconnaissance, methewan. So this is one of the major players here. This guy named methewan, a British guy.
Expected that the Boer positions would be on the far side of the river utilizing the high ground and a village as a defensive line.
Instead, Delare elected to place his man on the forward bank of the river in well came off-faged positions.
And Fassis was placed on grazing fire over the flat, felt while artillery ranging was a aided, aided by strategically placed white stones. Oh, that's mean.
So they set up visual targets that they could see and know the ranges of. Oh, that's nasty.
From trenches, the burgers could see three miles into methewan's rear.
As the British troops approached the river, the Boer's open fire, pinning them to the ground on coordinated advances increased the slaughter.
Boer Gunners concealed 200 yards forward of some building suspected of harboring them, re-tavic on the defense on the dense British artillery formations whose batteries had been withdrawn to 1400 yards to escape the burgers rifle fire and artillery fire.
Charges were impossible when men had a crawl at 1200 yards and no one could safely ride horse back within 2,000 yards in the front.
So what happened here, let me break this out a little bit, you had the art, so you had the British advancing in an open field.
The Boer's let them get close enough so that they could start killing them with rifle fire.
When they get close enough and start killing them with rifle fire, which is probably 400, 500, 600 meters away, they start running away as they're out of range of the rifle fire, what comes in artillery.
The pre-determined artillery positions by white stones that they've laid out there.
This is crafty.
However, persistent pressure on the light, left flank, eventually carried the river line and the bought the British another victory at a disproportionate loss.
So eventually they keep, they get it done, right?
They have enough people to get around to a flank and they get it done.
The British Army of 1899 had in reality stumbled into World War I type of battlefield, the question remained as to whether it was to be treated as an aberration or something new.
It seemed easy to blame.
The near disaster on faulty maps, poor reconnaissance, disregarded information on Boer reinforcements and general misunderstanding of their intentions.
So isn't that interesting?
Do we say, hey, that didn't seem to work out too well.
Or do we say, you know, we didn't have good maps and our reconnaissance was very good and we didn't expect this from the Boers.
That's not taking extreme ownership.
That's blaming everything else, not us, not us as leaders.
Matthew and hope to cover his advance by means of heavy preliminary bombardment of the heights and now I'm fast forward a little bit, but the Boers would set up.
This is just, it seems so obvious right now, but instead of setting up in the perfect position, maybe on the crest of a hill where you have total high ground dominance,
they put a little distraction up there and they'd set up in a different position, maybe lower on the hill or in the military crest, you know, maybe two thirds of a third of the way down the hill or whatever.
So as the, as the brits attack and they start bombing the top of the hill, because that's where they think they're going to be, they're not there.
Under a driving range storm.
The Highland Brigade Quarter column set off for Boer positions only be discovered a few hundred yards from the Boers' real positions.
Within six minutes, unestimated 650 men lay dead or wounded on the belt.
For the rest of the day, the survivors suffered horribly as they were pinned down by fire, baked by the sun and ceaselessly attacked by the ants behind whose nests many of them hid.
By mid-afternoon, the brigade was in a route.
The feet was clear cut, had methewan waited another day for the weather to clear he could have used his balloon to explore Boer positions.
Too much faith had been placed in shrapnel.
Then they, I don't know the other thing, I didn't talk about this, but the Boers would dig really good positions.
They would dig in.
They would set up on these hills and they would dig in and they kind of described what they would dig in.
They would dig in really deep foxholes that actually had a little kind of roofs on them as well.
And the brits thought, hey, if we're for a huckin' bombs at these guys, they're all going to blow up, but they was having almost zero effect.
Because if you're in a hole in artillery shell hits near you, you're going to be okay.
Unless it goes in the hole, you're going to be okay.
So too much faith had been placed in shrapnel, which had been proven ineffective against the trenches.
Poor reconnaissance ineffective artillery preparation in a complicated night attack.
Are we doing things complicated? No.
We're keeping it simple.
And poor economy of force will hardly be the ingredients of success.
So we have complicated attacks, or we're not obeying the law of simply keeping things simple, law of combat.
And also poor economy of force. What that means is you're not prioritizing that cutie.
You're not focusing your efforts on one thing.
And this is a common mistake that these guys made.
Fast forward a little bit.
While methewin may be accused of being unimaginative in his approach, such could not be said about general sirawilium gattaker,
who had actually ushered in the black week at Stormburg on December 12.
He proposed to achieve both strategic and tactical surprise by means of a long rail move,
followed by a 10 mile night march up the enemy positions before they were even new he was in the area.
He's got a pretty dynamic plan.
Almost from the first his plan went awry.
After 17 hours in open top railway cars under the mid-summer sun,
his command became lost in its night march,
fearing discovery gattaker sent out no scouts.
Or flanking columns as his men stumbled through the night.
On clear as to his location he decided on a flank approached Stormburg rather than on the original direct attack,
but failed to communicate to his entire command.
Storm march discipline alerted the local commando and the entire column was soon under attack.
Artillery men with the sun in their eyes managed to only shell their own troops,
forcing them from a ridge line.
They were on the point of taking.
As miss hat followed confusion gattaker ordered a withdrawal,
only later to discover he had abandoned the fuselaire regimen.
So, damn, this is just a very horrible thing.
You've got a blue on blue. You've got the team lost.
You've got them leaving an element in the field.
The final defeat of Black Week was suffered by General Bullar at Colenso,
just 12 miles from Lady Smith.
A mere 6,000 boars repelled 21,000 British troops from behind a thinly held riverline.
The boar position was by no means a strong one.
For a front of over 15 miles they had to hold two bridges and several fjords.
The southern fjords were particularly vulnerable as they were situated barely within rifle range to their rear,
which formed a natural line of defense. As usual, a boar is ignored,
preliminary to bombardment and fired only when the British advanced.
Once it became apparent that the boar medium and heavy guns far outrange the British,
comparable British pieces.
So, this is the way this thing kicks off.
Heard Yard, a tack went off first and was supposed to be closely supported by Colonel Long's field artillery.
The 1889 drillbook recommended that unsupported artillery not moved closer than 1700 yards from the enemy.
Without notifying anyone long, advanced within 700 yards.
An unlimored and close-ordered, unlimored is when you detach your weapons from there.
Like your big guns, you have monwheels, you detach them. It's unlimored, unlimored in close-order.
Although this tactic worked in Egypt in 1881, here his gunners were shot capices by boar riflemen.
Later, Long would claim he had intended to unlimored over 2,000 yards, but it had been deceived by the night.
So he's making excuses.
Butler was one of the most popular and personally brave commanders in the Army Hughes actually received any of the victorious cross of the highest award.
His care for men was legendary and closely entwined with his reforms in the Army Service Corps,
however, his preparations were overly meticulous.
And in the midst of the South African summer, his wagons carried great coats for the infantry.
Gotta keep these guys warm. In South Africa, in the summer.
Despite his concern for his men, Butler had proved a portrait commander who attacked with little knowledge of terrain or enemy dispositions.
His command control was an adequate order in precise and the withholding of two brigades in the face of a vastly outnumbered enemy was unprofessional.
This guy's making all kinds of mistakes. The defeats of the block week collectively had a greater impact than done Kirk.
Britain at the peak of her powers had been mauled by a nation of farmers.
The insularity of decades was shattered, latent, latent, foreign, and a mosque revealed its safe itself in the international press.
Yet the nation rallied to meet its moment of crisis head on as thousands volunteered for service.
Lord Roberts had been appointed to supersede, Mueller, when the latter in a fit of post-defeat depression had signal general right that he might consider surrender.
Shaking by his demotion, Mueller resolved to attack a new before Roberts arrival by means of turning the bull right flank.
So this is just like, I mean, can you imagine what this, the whole scenario is like this guy's, he's saying I'm going to surrender and then he flies off the handle because no, I'm going to attack him.
I mean, we're just talking disaster.
Emotional disaster.
The whole world knows that you just got beat by a bunch of farmers.
I mean, you're that heavyweight champ.
And you just had a guy show up in a whatever.
He's waited 120 by your 300 pounds.
We're in basketball shorts. Yeah, he showed up wearing a basketball shorts, barefoot.
Any kick your ass.
So he goes to try and make this happen.
Some 1700 men were to assault the hills, 1,740 feet high in the center of the brewer position.
The rest of the butbullers, 20,000 men were to look on and do nothing.
This is where you got to prioritize next to you.
You understand that prioritize next to you means you're going to take your resources that you have and you're going to focus them on getting something done.
Instead of saying, well, I'm going to keep reserves over here.
I'm going to keep reserves over here.
I'm going to send you know, and I'm going to send 1700 people to take a thousand of 1700 foot tall tall hill.
I got 20,000 people. This is no brainer. You want me to take that hill?
The best. My number one priority. Cool. Watch this.
The boars had neglected to occupy much of its key position, but the British failed to make the most of the opportunity in accurately exploring or enhancing it.
So they get the hill incorrectly cited shadow trenches were dug by 20 sappers while over a thousand men lay idle.
So they get this hilltop and I got to continue it.
Normally, a Italian was was allocated 70 spades, but they had been left behind in the Ascent.
Colonel Maurice complained, somehow our soldiers by dint of perverse training have imbibed the idea that there is somehow that there is something cowardly and sneakish about sitting behind cover in the field.
Or at any rate, if they have to get into trenches and works, it is the royal engineers province to provide these defenses.
So these guys got up on top of the hill and were like, hey, there's a thousand soldiers on top of the hill. There's 20 people, 20 engineers to dig and they sit back and watch.
A because they think it's cowardly and b they think that's not my job.
If this is, what's weird about this happening?
Right, like we're looking back and up can you imagine you're sitting there is thousands of people. You know you could be attacked and you're thinking, I'm not picking up a shovel.
And by the way, we didn't even bring shovels and by the way, we only have 70 shovels for a whole battalion.
Yeah, I mean, you think that in that situation, that's just kind of the left over added to all the straight up prevalent attitude of not having to really fight fight fight fight, you know.
Yeah, because you've never had your ass kicked.
Yeah, so like you took a shot and now you're like, I'm not going to worry about that.
Yeah, it's going to be okay.
You get taken down like after the first round and the first round you get taken down and then your coach, you know in between rounds the corner man says, you're doing great.
Yeah, no, you're not.
Yeah, and he's like, I remember.
So back long time ago, right, before people knew about judyatu, so this guy, it was actually my friend told me the story about when he got in a fight and he just learned judyatu.
And I'm trying to remember the exact situation, but he basically says the story where he got in a fight with a guy and then the guy, you know, they got in the fight or the and he choked him up, right, and when he woke back up, he wanted to fight again.
Of course.
So before they fought again, he was like, yeah, I'm going to, it's like, yeah, you keep, you give me with that sneak attack stuff, right, almost like they're not fighting or something.
Yeah, almost like that's just doesn't count.
Yeah, I don't think I own it's kind of cowardly or whatever, you know, it's like, yeah, they start or the guy who gets taken down right here and you see this, actually even now he gets taken down.
Oh, we're just wrestling me.
Once they just wrestling, he's looking at the raft like, raf, stand us up kind of thing, like almost complaining about certain situations in the middle of the fight.
So it's kind of like that's that situation right there, like, oh, I'm not taking nothing.
Yeah, we don't do that. Yeah, probably you're a fight, you're in a war, by the way. So they just don't realize it almost, you know.
Continuing on, while virtually the entire British army stood idle, the Boor army was free to focus his attention and artillery on the hilltop position.
Lacking shelter proper equipment lines, clear lines of authority or knowledge that artillery was flying the on the way up, the British abandoned the position as untenable.
This is farmers.
The superior, the superiority of the individual Boor marksman and the inadequacy of this small British small unit tactics was never more in evidence throughout the day one brigade had carried the fighting.
One demonstrated and three stayed in reserve of further testament to poor tax Greece. You had three other brigades.
Five thousand, I'm guessing it's, you know, no, no, all brigade might be like 5,000 people.
That's insane.
The dealers qualities as a commander or in many ways indicative of the army. You did not know when to draw the line with his subordinates. And this is interesting.
Heart was still, so one of his subordinates, heart was still marching his men and quarter columns at the second battle of Colenso, despite being told not to.
The warren was allowed inordinate freedom despite compromising the entire battle. At other times, Boor interfered with poor results, such as at twin peaks, he lacked a sense of terrain.
In sufficient perseverance, time and time again, robbed him of victory, as did his hoarding of reserves, as if his troops were 18th century professionals.
First, Battle of Colenso, only 4,800 men out of a force of 21,000 were engaged at any one time. And at Spine Cop, 3,000 men out of 24,000.
Staff problems be deviled to his battles. Chained a commands were unclear and artillery was frequently misplaced or uncordinated.
In addition, strong, wild and ambitious subordinates such as warrener long and heart were difficult to control. Boorler became, Boorler came to appreciate the value of cover.
Rushes and creeping barrage and according to Marisa's official history was the original originator of curtain fire at the second battle of Colenso.
Now, he started catching on a little bit, he now used mounted troops as a maneuver element on the flanks of infantry. The new battle field involved protracted fire fights along extensive front coordinated with precise artillery support and an incest and creeping forward of the infantry.
Whereas Boorler had taken several months and three major engagements to develop a counter to the Boor methods of warfare, Robert, so a guy gets sent down to take his place, Robert's ride, Robert's arrived in South Africa with his own strong preconceptions.
The old India hand, he placed his faith in cavalry and mobility rather than firepower. Robert set a ride and cape early in January to find the army everywhere in retreat. Rather than create, this is interesting. Rather than create immediate political problems.
He allowed Boorler and Mithuan to stay in command, although with limited forces, this is like a little play in the game. So instead of just coming down there firing these guys, he knew that that would be very disrupted, so he kept them there. He just gave him like really small elements to control.
Robert would always remain careful with generals associated with woesley ring with the woesley ring. So there was a guy named General Woesley who saw a War hero and a general and he had like its crew.
And these guys were part of his crew. And he, you know, the, this guy General Woesley Garrett Woesley was a War hero and a general and a powerful guy. And so he had a crew and these guys were part of that crew. And so he was also, that's another reason why I can't blame him.
Oh, okay, you know. Not just going to come down there and fire these guys because Woesley's got a lot of power. The entire army was suffused with pettingness Hamilton and little tin lost no opportunity to betray Butler and clearly and clear he constantly fought Warren and little son. So you just have like babies right.
Robert's funneled all reinforcements to the cape rather than Natal despite an increasing numeric predominance. He lulled the boars into the belief that he was tied to the railways.
So the brits and I haven't really talked about the brits were using the railways to run their supplies and stuff like that. And so he's kind of, he's kind of letting the boars think that we're addicted to the railways.
When ready in late January, Robert's massive army struck for to the east threatening boars supply lines as the boars withdrew from their earlier block in persistence.
French is this is one of the brit generals, French's entire cavalry division. The largest such british unit in history was launched around their flank for the relief of Kimberly.
With victory so close, fast forward a little bit, they continue to kind of do well. The brits now under Robert's with victory so close. Nature now intervened for Robert was incapacitated by a cold. You got sick.
And Kitsner, his chief of staff assumed command. Kitsner launched an immediate concentric assault against the boars which now which most veterans realized had little chance of success.
More than a core was thrown into the fruitless and uncorrelated attacks. So this is ridiculous. So this guy, Robert's is doing pretty well. Kitsner takes over because Robert's literally gets a cold.
When this guy takes over man, he just goes, gets, he goes hard. He's trying to get a name for himself.
And he starts all these attacks trying to basically surround the boars.
More than a core was thrown into the fruitless and uncorrelated attack, commanders were ignored. Kitsner wrote about the field directing battalions and raising havoc.
Frustration mountain is mounted as battled daysed men began to trickle back from the front line and wander about for lack of orders to entrench.
As Kitsner attempted to launch yet another attack, he stripped troops from a key terrain feature.
This guy is just a micromanager just trying to make things happen. It's horrible to read. Once back in command, Robert ceased further assaults and resorted to 10 days of bombardment and a final night attack.
So isn't it? You know, we always talk about how leadership is the most important thing on the battlefield.
And I skipped the whole chunk of where everything's just falling apart. Kitsner suffered 1,200 casualties. He almost lost one of the major cities.
Ridiculous. So Robert's comes back in and just stop.
And then he kind of starts these more methodical attacks and continues that the start and stop offenses of Robert's head, but one objective, the capture of the Boer capitals and with that the presumed end of the war.
Despite continued guerilla attacks, Portoria, the second Boer capital fell on June 4th. The link of a general Boer on July 4th signal the end to all conventional resistance. By mid December, Roberts had departed and Kitsner was left in charge of mopping up operations.
So that's kind of the the overview of how it went down. At least up till that point the most general examination of British army's performance in South Africa reveals flaws on virtually every level of command.
Lord Wolsey, this is the guy I just talked about. The commander and chief had been excluded as the field commander on account of his age.
Army and royal politics along with anti-India prejudice served to eliminate various other candidates for the post and general Boer rose to the top of the list despite his recent poor showing in maneuvers and lack of independent command experience.
Although an able staff officer like most British officers, he confused personal bravery with the ability to lead Narmee.
This is just a common theme and I'm not hitting as much of it as I should in the book, but this idea of the brits that like personal bravery was going to be enough to win the day.
It's so strange to badmouth that, right? Because courage is you know, one of the most.
The most powerful characteristics that we can envision a human being with, right? This ultimate level of courage and sacrifice.
But in many ways, it was a negative quality because they thought if they had that they're good to go. You know, then this you want to take it back to the MMA.
You know, you see that one guy that's all kinds of fired up, but he's yelling and screaming for a fight and he's highly motivated. He might even be training really hard in his strength and conditioning.
And he might be ready to go the distance. He might be ready to die when he goes in the ring.
And it doesn't matter when you get in there again someone that has better skill than you and that out maneuvers you, all that courage and bravery doesn't do a damn thing, but get you killed.
So I guess it's not that crazy to look at that characteristic from a different angle.
If you're putting your whole, now look, if you have a fighter that's a whim, right, that lacks any kind of courage, a lack bravery, right? They're not even going to get in the cage.
They're going to be scared to get hit. They're going to run away and they're going to lose, but you have to have both. You have to have courage. You have to have skill.
Yeah, I mean, to add to that to, you know, you get a guy MMA again, a guy who's like his, you know, he's a great wrestler, great grappler, good submission guy, whatever.
And then the other guys may be a really good striker and he talks a lot of trash and interviews and stuff. So he gets some of the guy's skin, the guy goes in super mad, super fired up, super motivated.
I'm going to, I'm going to basically beat him. That is only how I'm going to knock him out. I'm going to strike, you know, rather than strategically go for, you know, make yourself in a better position as far as like tactically strategically whatever.
And then he starts to stand well, many get knocked out. Of course. You can be motivated, but rather guys would just wait better than you, you've got to be smarter than that, you know, kind of thing.
Yeah, it feels like that's what they're doing to.
Yeah.
Now, so that kind of wraps up some overviews of what happened on the ground and look, like I said, there's, there's, I got some books that are first person perspective on the ground.
Boo or war.
And what we can go into those, I'm sure we will at some point. But where this book goes next is how they took the lessons learned and what they did with those lessons learned, positive and negative.
But as I sit here and look at my notes, it's, it's, it's not short. There's a lot of things that got learned and there's a lot of lessons that they incorporated and there's a lot of lessons that they didn't.
Or there's lessons that they made progress towards and then backed away from.
So, rather than do it right now, I want to leave enough time for that. So, let's call it.
And we'll pick up the Boer War Military Reforms on episode 2303. So, in the meantime, echo Charles.
Yes.
Since we are trying to learn.
Oh, yeah.
So, we are trying to make progress.
Yes.
How can we continue to make progress as individual humans?
First off, making progress isn't always comfortable.
It's not always painless.
But, good news about that is we have help. So, speaking of pain and growing pain, if you will.
So, join to get a little sore when you left.
Indeed.
And, I got to be honest, I've been out of the supplementation situation for a little bit. This is a little while ago, a few weeks ago.
But, I got the replenishment of supplements.
And what I'm talking about is...
That's bad planning.
Yeah.
Do you sound like the British Army on that one?
No, no, no.
Look around.
Things to blame.
You know, I got busy caught up.
Nonetheless, anyway, what I'm saying is, look, when we're on the path, we go hard.
Most of the time.
I'm not saying go hard into the ground.
I'm saying you go hard.
You know, you got to progress demands.
Hard work.
We got to push the envelope.
Got to push the envelope.
I heard a quote from Denzel Washington.
He said, ease is a greater threat to progress than a hardship is.
That's like, oh, that was pretty good.
Concert.
It's true.
It's very true.
But, through that hardship, you get joint pains.
Sometimes.
For Denzel Washington.
For Worked is whole life, too.
And she's this level of skill.
And you just took his, his quote and turned it into your little personal advertisement for
joint work for.
Well, that's what just happened.
It's, I more turned it into my personal eye.
Apologize to you, Mr. Denzel Washington.
Yeah.
Well, I'm going to let echo roll.
He'd be happy because I'm incorporating that into,
how should I say my, my daily, my life, my approach to life.
How about that?
Don't seek ease.
Don't seek the rest between sets.
Oh, you got to take the rest between sets.
But don't seek the rest between sets.
Nonetheless.
Anyway, when you're basically when you join,
skits sore, take joint warfare because it actually works.
You're going to set that last four minutes ago.
You know, yeah, like, yeah, you're probably right about that.
You know what I saw a video of.
So many posted, so many posted the support section,
but they were just listening to you talk and listening to you and I go back
to work, but they were laughing and staring.
And I was like, that's a good thing to see.
Well, yeah, it's a good thing to see.
Yeah.
Because most of the time I'm figuring this, the number of people listening right now,
zero.
Like when they, when they hear me say,
okay, echo, they go, oh, yeah, fuck.
That's over.
Or I cast his old fast forward to, you think they're missing an agent.
If they did that, they just missed a Denzel Washington quote.
Yeah, tell us what we're talking about.
Ease is a greater threat to hardship than,
or sorry, Ease is a greater threat to progress than comfort than hardship is.
Ease is okay.
Got it.
Yeah, good.
We'll give some props to Denzel Washington.
It was good.
But anybody that pressed stop a little early,
they didn't get to hear that.
Oh, they missed it from you slash Denzel Denzel.
Oh, man.
All right, well, there you go.
And like I said, joint warfare.
If you don't have joint, where if we get joint warfare.
That's your whole point.
That is the point.
That is the whole point.
That's why Denzel Washington said what he said.
Yeah, one of the reasons.
One of the reasons why he said.
He said, when did you get your warfare in Creloyle?
That was money is trying to say.
Yeah, essentially.
That is core.
That's what it meant for sure.
Don't forget about the, don't forget about the discipline.
The discipline go in cans.
The discipline powder form, jockel Palmer.
My recommended scenario.
Why?
Because it tastes like an Arnold Palmer iced tea with the perfect amount of lemonade in there.
It's kind of as little bit of sweetness to it.
But it's sweetened with monk fruit.
Yeah.
That's not sugar.
You're all good.
You're not going to need insulin spike.
No, you're going smooth flat line that thing.
Easy money.
And you'll get a little bit of a little bit of hype.
A little bit of a.
You know, you have that noise that you use for a sound effect.
It's like that high pitched like thing that's being prepared.
What's the noise?
There's a name.
Well, there's two of them with the one you're talking about is like,
It's basically like a, you know, the old school flash.
Yes, from a camera.
It feels like things are about to prep.
Yeah.
Things are about to go off.
So we do.
We need to, you can edit this.
You can put it when I say you get that little and you can put it right.
So I'm going to do it.
So I'm going to give you a little spot when you get that little.
Boom.
There you go.
And that's the discipline go.
Yeah.
Imagine if you did all your, all your CGI into the actual podcast.
And I was talking about covering fire and there was machine guns going off.
That'd be the most popular podcast of all thought.
Tracer's coming between us.
Yeah.
That could be something.
There'd be horses getting killed.
You know, my horses got killed in the Boor wards crazy.
Yeah.
I think that'd be kind of the strategy in a way.
Or kill horses.
Yeah.
Get the horses.
I think you're trying to kill with people.
But yeah.
But if we're trying to kill the enemy, the enemy horses, I guess.
All right.
In there.
Yeah.
Stop their mobility.
Right.
Like, and it's a big target.
You know, I don't know.
I've never tried to kill horses.
So, you know, I don't have that experience.
What else we got?
On the last moke.
So speaking of moke.
I made a moke shake last night.
That's it.
So I mixed them dark chocolate and the peanut butter chocolate.
Right.
Whatever.
You know, not much of a deviation.
It's not like a mixed strawberry with, you know, with it.
Anyway.
And so the thing is, I haven't had a moke chicken a while in front of the kids.
And they, you know, they don't know.
They think I'm making like, I don't know.
Some dessert.
Mm-hmm.
You know.
And so they're like, yeah, I want some.
Some like cool.
And I give them some.
They drink the whole thing.
Mm-hmm.
Regular won't.
Can you imagine like, you can just give yours kids something that makes them so strong and healthy.
And they think that they're, that they're just a great dad.
Like they scored.
That's literally what I thought they're looking at me kind of like, like, can we actually
have that cause it's big.
Mm-hmm.
And you know, there are two kids that drink.
You're like, drink a little thing.
No, I wasn't taking it back.
I wanted to because you know, it was mine.
But at the same time I was like, I'm going to have that at it because it was just so,
it brought so much happiness.
Did you see your did you see your son starting to get a little bit jacked
Yep, that's just the ways buddy is drink one milkshake boom jacked that's a gear that's actually
Well now we can it's guaranteed now. No, we know it's been tested. Yeah. Yeah, you're son is now jacked
How old is he three years
Jacks
It's a mole kiss more your kid mole. Good some chocolate. You
You can get all this stuff at the vitamin chopper your vitamin shop opens up
Choco fuel. Yep. That's what it's called a parent. Yes. Also what we're doing is due to okay
Look varying levels of participation due to arena understand and I think it's gonna slowly
I slowly this tournament's going on. Yeah. Yeah, so hey, that's something some people are making it happen. Yeah
Good so anyway, so we're doing due to we're starting due to you
We're continuing due to so when we do due to this and we need to get an origin gear
We already know that 100% because they're the best geese straight up. That's the the number the primary
situation
factually factually as you like to see even yeah, and
They happen to be made in a marriage that will happen to be made in a matter of a problem
the fact that these geese are so comfortable that Denzel
Is sort of you know at parade rest over in the corner of the shed
Headstand boys what's up? It's a good that's a good question
Because when you put the rift geon you you you're you're in a different world of due to you're in a different world of
due to when you put the rift geon yeah fully and the thing is you feel it and here's the thing I think about most of us is like
We get used to nice stuff you just get used to it
So you could not go back. It's like if you ever found an airplane first class it's an economy sucks forever
I know man. When you put on a rift geey
Every other geey that you put on front the rest of your life is economy class
That's what's happening. It's a visceral insult to my sense. Yeah, do you you in the old days
Man, I had some geese that I felt like I was putting on something that was made out of concrete
That's what I was feeling
This is
It's good. It's not concrete at all. It's luxurious. I'm gonna say it's luxurious straight up and
They happen to me so I actually do say happened to be made in America, but they're not they don't have been
No, I mean
Han purpose it's kind of one of the purposes behind them. Yeah, and also speaking of just
Next level first class
Sorry, Dan's out comfort
Get yourself some delta 68 jeans which are
We need it's like another category you've clothing because you not you're not feeling like you're wearing jeans, right?
You're not feeling like oh I gotta put these jeans on them and I'm gonna feel constricted and hot
Now you put it on the delta 68's you're ready just to do a straight up
You know maneuver
Yeah, you're ready to do a go-go plotter in those things. Yeah, so you kind of think of it and not to go to deep into a tangent
Far beyond for me, but
You just say far be it for you to go to a day. It's if you know from okay, yes, but you know, okay
So there's a difference between ease and comfort and
functionality
It's your maximizing your functionality and a because of comfort. Yeah, right? Yeah, yeah, so yeah
And even saying comfort is kind of misleading so look if I have a sword
I'm fighting in a battle with a sword and this sword is ergonomically designed for my hand
ergonomics right performance will increase and it's a benefit. Yeah, it's comfortable. Yes, you're doing better
You're more it whether it be efficient more functional more everything comfortable. Yes, but more
Seems same so that's the delta 68 scenario that will work good like when you go in a battle
If let's say you go in a battle and you have that sword that ergonomically fits your hand
That is gonna be work really good until I cut your freaking arm off because that's what I'm gonna do
Yeah, you took it in their interesting direction, you know as far as the point, but you know
I dig it in your probably right, but you're less in order to know where they're saying that you get this
Irgonomically correct sword and that's gonna be well difference. It's fine saying bring it
Yeah, I cut your damn arm off. Yeah, you realize you just assumed that I was going into battle against you
Yeah, I'm here
You're like I here. All right. Hey, you're right and you do make a good point on top of my original point for sure
And I haven't even really trained much sword, but I will start training. You're yeah
You're down. You have a lot of what do you call bravery and I don't care
You know what it doesn't matter ergonomically correct or not. I'm taking your arm off
Huh strategically. That's the move. That's what we're doing. Yeah, and you you can get change
You can get boots. You can get t-shirts. You can get whatever you want from origin main dot com
M-a-i-n-e
origin main dot com. Yes, also we have our own store
If you're interested in representing while on the path this bleeding was freedom good
Take the high ground where the high ground will take you
That was a little sleeper one. That was good
We got some designs coming yes, and by the way
We're not gonna talk about it now, but the last design you submitted to me is
It's almost for full approval. I had to do a couple of historical researches make sure we are 100%
But we're there. Oh, okay. Well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well
Do one little maybe two little things to it just to clean it up, but we're
We're real happy about that one design by joko. Yeah, yeah, I'm pretty good
I'm proud of that as far as being fired up about a design goes for sure
But yes, so you go to joko store dot com. That's what I like this whole thing about design by joko
That's kind of weird. Yeah, maybe not pushed that yeah, but factually it's true
Let's move on
fashion designer. Yes, anyway, yes joko store dot com
Yeah, we got a lot of stuff on there hats hoodies shirts obviously
Very six accessories good stuff. I think it's good stuff anyway. Yeah, and by the way if you want a
If you like that if you listen to this podcast and you want to support the podcast
This is a way to do it. You know, you know, you know, we're not over here saying like
First of all, we're not saying hey, you need to listen to the next six minutes of us reading about some random thing
That we don't actually care about or know about right?
That's true. We're not doing that. No, we're not saying hey don't ate money to whatever because whatever
We're not doing that. We're saying hey listen to this if you happen to feel like oh
Let's throw some support. We don't even want your support. We want you to have a t-shirt
You know, that is that's what we want. Yes, that way we can pee ID you in the wild
Yes, that's positively ID you
There's no there's and you know you're looking over what a little glance. I see a little I see a little whatever
Sure, we know what's up. You know what you're gonna get head none. We're all good. I
Will get I know if something goes down you got my back
Right? Oh, yeah, tell me this you're looking here something's going down whatever call it whatever you want
There's nine people that you can go. Hey come with me
One of them is wearing a jockel podcast t-shirt who's going with you?
100% 100% 100% I don't care what the other people are wearing actually
They could be wearing what I don't even know it could be wearing a sports team
Well, I'll see people wear on a t-shirt a rock and roll band
Like look there's some categories that are gonna be
You know what I mean? Yeah, you know, but if you guys got a jockel podcast t-shirt on yeah
He's coming with automatic admission. Hey. He might even be there might be a like let's say you see with a guy with a
Gjz who t-shirt on let's say it's that kind of situation that's going down. Oh, he's coming to you
He's coming to yeah
Yeah
Very similar so you might as well just prep for that moment
And by the way look it might not be me it might be some other trooper out there
That's gonna that's gonna that's gonna detach that's gonna look around
That's gonna make the right decision at the right time
Yeah, that's gonna understand what you said when you say cover me
Yeah, they're gonna go got it boom. We're already in action. Yeah. We got a militia
We got a commando
True, who do if you want you have a trace between someone you know is on the path? So versus someone who you don't know
I'm not saying that not I'm saying you don't know and if they're on the path you kind of know them
Right they didn't get it they didn't just get that t-shirt right? Right they listened to the podcast
They know where we're coming from they understand there's gonna be some some some suffering that might unfold in the next 13 seconds while this
Situation's happening. We got it
You know so anyways you might let yourself a jockel podcast
Yeah, stop the start.com. We appreciate it. Yes sir also
Subscribe to the podcast on your favorite or your preferred
podcast listening
App
Application whatever you may yeah, so subscribe. We've been already and you know leave a review if you're in the mood. I think
Yeah, it's good. It's good if you want to look through a little
Communication our way we I read the reviews. Yeah, haven't highlighted one. I got a read a funny review
I'm gonna go on there pull up a good review
For while it's copy and pacing some of them because they were really good
That that's something that we like to refer to as layers
One else we got don't forget about some other podcasts
We got a podcast we had a podcast
Who's called the thread will be re releasing it soon I? I said we were coming up with a new name and we are but
We're that's what we're doing so that'll be out soon and episode eight. Yes everyone's been asked before
I'm sorry it's been taking a while we got the grounded podcast where we talk about you jitsu somebody just asked for a podcast about
Women's jiu jitsu for jockel podcast and we already had it we had it on the grounded podcast
So check out grounded podcast if you want to hear about jiu jitsu and life
Warrior kid podcasts
Just get your kids on the path
Set them up to have an awesome life
Get them on the warrior kid podcast if you
Also want to support a warrior kid
You can go to irishokes ranch.com and you can get aiden who is making
soap
Which allows you your family your friends everyone you know if you get this soap you can all
Stay clean
Yeah, speaking of which
If I'm not mistaken and it looked deep into it, but I saw I saw hints of a new warrior kid soap
Yeah, yeah, or you're so that too
So hints all right. Yes, so you want your children too
Stay staying
Also YouTube channel we do have a YouTube channel for video video version of this podcast
Exorps on there if there's anyone that would like to see
CGI special effects during the podcast
Let's get echo freaking working harder because right now he just cut what do you how hard is this?
You show me you show you you show me you show you
This podcast you didn't say anything so just basically me me me me me
You're not doing any work, but but that's where they can we get some some horses trampling across
I mean how cool would that be? What do they call it when they only hide something in like a video game or a movie?
They hide something that you got to look for
Easter egg yes
People should go on the YouTube and they see when I mentioned something
You know all of a sudden there's a zulu warrior over my shoulder or whatever you know
I am yeah, that's that's a thing
Why is it that you claim to be the creative guy and I'm over here coming up with all the ideas?
I don't have you notice that? No
Where are you at? I don't think you are why am I covering the movie?
For this whole thing how about this we'll look into it cool?
Okay, if you don't put a special effect at least one thing that happens
During the podcast you're disappointing everybody that's here
I'm sure that's actually correct. Oh, I guarantee that's factually correct
You know when we did the audiobooks for extreme ownership and that I caught a
Be a leadership extreme ownership so if you listen the extreme ownership audiobook I don't want to
Try and make it sound crazy, but there's audio effects in there. Yes, there's machine gun fire
There's the call the prayer there's some explosions and when we when we decided to do that
Well first of the main reason as late for night we've got like words written in there like
Pup, pup, pup, pup, like machine gun fire and I don't want to start off the chapter going you know
There's one enemy trace around zipping overhead right I don't want to have to make that noise so
What we did was they put special effects in there and the the company
The the publisher was kind of acting they were cool, but they were kind of acting like this was
Like it was crazy like it was a little bit of a crazy idea
So anyways they did it and that's a lot of people are stoked on it
But you got to be ready for it because if you're driving your car and you're an explosion or machine gun fire
Especially if you've been in the game, you know like for real you might get a little bit of like a little bit of a
adrenaline flow no big deal all good so
Yeah, maybe so I think that the same way that that will enhance the audio books for the dichotomy leadership
and and extreme ownership
If someone had their requisite skills
To actually make something cool in here it'd be good
All right well keep it in mind okay, we also have psychological warfare if you need a little
Psychological heater when you need to go
Overcome a little moment of weakness you can just check out psychological warfare
It's on all the mp3
platforms
Flipside canvas if you want a visual representation of the path check it out flipside canvas dot com decoder myor
Put in cool graphic representations of things that you hang on your wall we got some books
We actually it seems like we have a bunch of books. Yes, there's a reason we've got the code
Which just came out
Which is a
A real good way just a step up and just go for it. That's the code we got leadership strategy and tactics field manual
We got way the warrior kid one two and three we got Mikey in the dragons
We got discipline he goes freedom of field manual we got extreme ownership of the dichotomy leadership check out all those books if you want to
Good information and I'll tell you what's cool
I hear this all the time you read the book once and you're like, oh cool, you know, I grab that I grabbed you know
You took a page notes you can take a page and notes on that book if you read it 50 times and roll
You'll take a page notes every time on any of these books that I'm talking about even the kids books
Yeah, I believe it fully
So
So check those out we got east echelon front which is
Leadership my leadership consultancy where we solve problems through leadership if you need help with leadership in your organization
Then go to echelon front dot com for details
We also have an online platform called ef online dot com where we
train
coach
mentor discuss
guide
People through pre-existing
Volumes that are on there and through live webinars that we're doing all the time
So if you actually have a question for me go to ef online dot com come to one of our live webinars and ask me your question
That's what's happening
so
We also have the mustard
And I you know, look this is going back and forth we got the virus this and that we had to cancel Orlando
I'm making the call right now Phoenix is on
We're going to Phoenix we're going to Phoenix Phoenix Arizona
September 16th and 17th actually just got off the phone with Jamie. I'm like can we do this Jamie says we can do this
Nice, all right rock and roll look and if we get to that point in September and we still have to do some kind of
Social distancing scenario
Whatever we got to do we got to do it but we're going to make it happen so
It's going to sell out everything we do sells out if you want to come and look here's the deal depending on the social distancing
mandates
We may have to limit the seating more than we normally would which means if you want to come by your tickets now so you don't get cut off
Because you thought there was going to be more seats so that's it. It's September 16th and 17th in Arizona
It's December 3rd and 4th in Texas Dallas Texas
People would say we should have gone to Dallas day one and we probably should have and I'll tell you another thing
We went to Austin and it was awesome
We did it kind of last minute and when we were an Austin people like hate come to Dallas
So we're coming to Dallas that's December 3rd and 4th
We're going to do that one two by the way
Who wants to get some and of course we have EFO Overwatch if you need
Executive leadership at your team if you need senior leadership at your team and you want somebody that's experienced
That's been tested
Then go to EFO Overwatch.com
It's a military leaders from special operations from combat aviation that
Understand the principles we talk about here and can employ them in your company
And if you're a vet and you have those kind of experiences
Go there as well so we can connect the dots also America's mighty warriors dot org
Mamma Lee
Mark Lees mom and
She is put together in organization
That helps service members and helps their families and helps gold star families all over the world guys that are on deployment
Guys that are home from deployment guys that are active duty guys that are retired
She is just unbelievable with what she does so go to America's mighty warriors at dot org
To either donate or get involved if you want to get involved and at this point
If you haven't had enough of my horrible
Horrible inexcusable
Pronunciation of various languages or you want to hear more of echoes sort of be will-dard stream of consciousness thoughts
Then you can find us on the inner web as
Twitter
Instagram and of course Facebook
Echoes at Echo Charles and I am at jockelwillink and thanks to our military men and women out there around the world in uniform
Who stand and face the darkness and evil every day
And thanks to our police law enforcement firefighters paramedics EMTs dispatchers correctional officers board of patrol secret service
Who stand and face darkest and evil here at home and
to everyone else out there
Do not fail to learn
Adapt to new environments change the way you operate
Don't get stuck in the past
Get better
Get better and improve
And the way you do that is by going out there and
Getting after it and until next time
This is echo and jockel out